In this episode of MarieTV, we do have some
adult language, so if you have little ones
around grab your headphones now.
Hey, it’s Marie Forleo and you are watching
MarieTV, the place to be to create a business
and life you love.
Now, today’s episode is adult in nature,
so if you’ve got little ones around or anybody
with sensitive ears now would be the time
to put on your headphones.
The reason why is we’re going to be discussing
a new book that’s coming out and it’s
called Pussy.
Now, I know that title may offend some, but
I have to tell you personally, I believe it’s
brave and courageous and this is a conversation
that we need to have.
Regena Thomashauer is an icon, teacher, author,
mother, and founder and CEO of the School
of Womanly Arts.
She believes that women are the greatest untapped
natural resource on the planet and she teaches
them to create a life they love.
The School of Womanly Arts began in Regena’s
living room in 1998 and has grown into a thriving
movement with thousands of graduates worldwide.
Regena has written 4 popular books and has
appeared on The Today Show, Late Night with
Conan O’Brien, 20/20, and more.
Her programs have been profiled in the New
York Times, Elle, and New York Magazine.
Regena.
Marie.
Thank you so much for coming back on the show.
I am so excited to have you on for this book.
So let’s dive right into it.
This is a very provocative, brave title.
What possessed you to do this?
To write this book?
And, of course, to name it what you named
it?
Do you think I wanted to write this book and
call it Pussy?
I wanted to do… have it be called anything
else but Pussy.
You know that better than anyone.
You’re the one that really gave me the courage
of my convictions and had me stand in my deepest
truth, which was to take this title.
I mean, I have a momma that’s going to be
embarrassed.
I have a teenage daughter that’s going to
be embarrassed.
But it was really, really important to me
to take this word and use it as a wake up
call, like any expletive.
It is a smack upside the head to a culture
that requires waking up in this particular
area.
So that word, you know, a lot of people use
it in a very demeaning way.
We say it all the time and it’s pejorative…
Oh my gosh.
Can you speak to that?
Pussy is the worst insult across the boards.
You know, if you call a man a pussy you’re
insulting his manhood and his masculinity.
If you call a woman a pussy your intention
is to hurt her or humiliate her, fracture
her humanity, have her feel like a sexual
object.
No one wants to be a pussy, much less have
a pussy.
But, you know, we live in a world where women
right now are… there’s a huge piece of
cultural conditioning that is unconscious.
We don't even pay attention to the fact that
our little girls, when they’re growing up,
we don't even give them the name for that
which is most essentially feminine about themselves.
There’s no language.
Like, when I teach at the School of Womanly
Arts, a few hundred women, I’ll say, “What
did your bits and pieces get called when you
were little?”
And I’ll get names like wiki, coo coo, pookie,
knish, Walter Winchell, princess, front bottom,
pee pee, wee wee, like all these crazy colloquialisms
and no actual commonality of name.
Some women will say, “Oh, it’s a vagina,”
but that’s actually physiologically incorrect.
It’s a vulva.
The worst is that more than half of my students
will say that it got called nothing.
And when you don't even give a little girl
the language to connect with that which is
most essentially feminine about herself, you’re
disempowering her.
And it’s not the same for little boys.
When I have a room full of my guys for men’s
night and I say what did your bits and pieces
get called, they say, “It always got called
a penis.
What’s your problem?”
So we perform this cultural clitoridectomy
on little girls and women and we’ll never
have access to our power until we can own
every bit of this gorgeous female body.
I think it’s really important because I’ve
heard you, you know, we’re friends and we
go out together and I’ve heard you have
conversations with people when they use that
word and give them a schooling like they’ve
never had a schooling before.
Gently, I hope.
Yeah, I mean, sometimes you’re gentle but
you just go right in and that’s one of the
things I appreciate about you.
But let’s talk what this book is really
about.
And I think you’re taking a stand for reclaiming
the values of the feminine, and you talk a
lot about this inside the book, inside a patriarchal
culture driven by masculine values.
Can you talk to what that means?
Yeah.
The world right now hates pussies and devalues
the feminine.
I mean, if we open the newspaper we’re going
to see stories about unchecked violence, which
is what happens in a world when the feminine
withdraws.
Women are actually withdrawn right now even
though we have so many freedoms that we never
had and so many opportunities that we never
had.
There’s a way in which we are stuck and
shut down.
And what am I seeing out there?
I’m seeing one in four women are going to
experience depression in their lifetimes and
only one in five of those women are ever going
to seek treatment.
And that’s twice as many cases of depression
as men have.
Women are twice as likely.
Right now heart disease is the number one
killer for women.
Every 34 seconds a woman drops dead of heart
disease.
And that’s in the area of health, but what
about the area of career or work?
Women right now, we make 79 cents on the dollar
that men make.
For African American women it’s 63 cents
on the dollar and for Hispanic women it’s
53 cents on the dollar than men make.
This is crazy.
And in Hollywood last year, of all the top
grossing films, only 9% were directed by women.
So we live in a time where the voice of woman
is not being heard, where she isn’t stepping
into that sense of herself or that sense of
her own power.
And that… those are just the facts.
What do you mean by patriarchal values specifically?
How do we distinguish between patriarchal
and the feminine values?
Yeah, it’s a good question.
A patriarchal value… right now in the world
there’s a, you know, patriarchy, masculine
and feminine, they’re both valuable but
the imbalance occurs when men and the masculine
are valued more than women and the feminine.
So it would be like any imbalance.
If you just ate pasta but no veggies, that’s
an imbalance.
You wouldn’t be healthy.
You know, if you just did aerobic training
and no weights, that’s not really healthy.
So we have this imbalance where the masculine
has kind of taken over and women are trying
to man up instead of woman up and become,
you know, they’re valuing what’s male
and not even knowing what’s female about
themselves.
So, for example, the values of the masculine
are… well, more like the patriarchy.
The values of a patriarchal culture would
be something like no pain no gain.
Work, work, work, work, work, work, work.
Don't pay attention to what you feel.
Just go for the bottom line, for the profit.
It’s not about the collective, it’s about
the individual winning and striving.
And you don't… it doesn't matter what you
have to do to get to the top, but you have
to get to the top.
That’s patriarchy.
Whereas the values of the feminine are less
known and we feel kind of weird if we act
according to the values of the feminine.
Those are things like we value interconnectedness,
we see the sacred in even mundane things,
you know, like this beautiful bowl of flowers.
There’s spirit in that.
We have passionate feelings, a full, wide
range of passionate feelings.
We have deep intuitions that, when paid attention
to, oh my goodness, are so important.
The value of receiving or surrendering is
important for the feminine.
So those are the things that are devalued
right now and I think everyone suffers on
account of that.
I agree and I think we are coming into a new
time, but that’s why I was so excited to
have you on.
And I’m so thrilled that you wrote this
book because we need to talk about it more
and we do need a wake up call around these
ideas.
One of the things I found fascinating that
I’ve learned from you, you know, it wasn’t
always this way, was it?
In terms of a patriarchal society.
It’s only been the last 5 thousand years
or so.
I know.
And that seems like a long time, but it’s
not a long time.
Because if we went back, you know, 30 thousand
years prior to the patriarchy, pussies were
the bomb.
They were everything.
They’re like the star of the show.
They were worshipped.
Mother earth was revered.
Women, because we could give life, we were
thought to be sacred and considered sacred
vessels and portals between the human and
the divine.
The power of the feminine was called upon.
All those aspects of ourselves were considered
so important for creativity and feeding the
earth and the people.
For example, let’s say we were… went back
in time to ancient Egypt and we went out the
very day that the crops were planted with
all the other ladies in ancient Egypt.
We would stand along the field with all of
our sisters and we would raise our skirts
and flash our pussies at the field of wheat.
And we would charge the earth and we would
say, “Wheat, may you grow as high as my
pussy.”
Right?
It’s kind of amazing.
Kind of.
There’s this pretty historic cave painting
and there’s a woman, a hunter, and then
his prey.
He’s pulling back his arrow and about to
capture his prey, but where does the power
come?
There’s a line drawn from his woman’s
pussy through his arrow into the prey so that
there was a connection between the feminine
presence even in the action of her man, her
hunter, and how that community was fed.
I think it’s so fascinating because most
of us don't know that much if you go back
to history that, that far.
That was another fascinating aspect to your
book.
So you say that pleasure is the direct antidote
to the crisis of confidence and powerlessness
that women are experiencing right now.
How so?
Oh, my.
Well, you know as women we were never taught
to pleasure ourselves.
We weren’t taught to pay attention to our
pleasure.
We were taught to ignore our pleasure and
we were taught to kind of man up and work
really, really, really, really hard.
I guess maybe one day we would get some pleasure
at the end of that, that was the theory.
But what happens instead is women get stressed
and we live…
I don't know when women have been more stressed.
It’s like this just universal stress for
women right now.
And to be clear, if anyone’s listening,
when you say women aren’t taught to pleasure
ourselves, while sure you could include masturbation
in this conversation that’s not really the
essence of what you’re talking about fully.
I’m talking about something as simple as
it could be taking a moment to feel the sunshine
on your skin and connecting to the fact that
you're alive right now.
It could be, you know, the genius of flowers.
Those are just… they cheer you up.
If you really look at those, it’s like a
bowl of miracles right there.
Yes.
But I’ll speak… so let me give voice for
any woman right now who may be like a little
bit like, “Uh, I don't know about this.
I don't know if I’m buying into this,”
because when we are in our masculine, which
is, you know, we’ve talked about this before,
it’s a place and it’s the energy that
I live in very, very easily.
Me too.
The mind can always go to, “Yeah, yeah,
yeah, I don't have time for this.
Like, I don't have time to pleasure myself,”
you know, meaning sit there and get the flowers.
I’ve got to get dinner ready, I’ve gotta
work, I’ve got to pay the bills.
What do you say to those women who are like,
“Yeah, it sounds like a fantasy but I don't
know if I can make this happen.
It’s literally not in reality”?
Yeah.
I say you have to listen to your little cells
which are screaming.
They’re saying, “Help.
I’m so stressed right now.
I’m being flooded with cortisol.
Please do something.”
Because cortisol, it’s bad news.
It not only makes us very irritated and…
Stressed out.
Stressed out and short tempered.
Right?
But it has health consequences.
First of all, we feel depressed, we feel angry,
we feel lonely, we feel disconnected.
And cortisol is supposedly the key to inflammation
in the body, which is one of the ways in which
diseases start, with inflammation.
So it’s… it’s dangerous to be stressed.
Right?
And we as women have this access to pleasure
because we have 8 thousand nerve endings on
our bodies dedicated to pleasure.
So what we can do is with the mere power of
our thought we can decide, ok, I am feeling
a profound amount of stress at the moment.
I think it’s time for a pleasure break.
That could be throwing on your favorite song
and just boogying for 30 second.
It could be a hot, hot shower with your favorite
bath gel.
It could be an orgasm.
It could be taking your tea in a real mug,
you know?
Like a real mug, not a paper cup.
It’s those little tiny moments that actually
flood your body with all of this beautiful…
what happens is when you have a pleasurable
experience it turns on neurotransmitters such
as beta endorphin and prolactin.
And what that does is flood your body with
a sense of health, a sense of joy, a sense
of connection, a sense of empowerment.
It’s a way of stepping into your power through
pleasure and it absolutely shuts that cortisol
right down and then your little cells are
like, “Thank you.
I needed that.”
Yes.
And I’m gonna give voice to this because
we’ve had this conversation many times privately
and I have it with many women that I know.
So for anyone who is listening and like, “I
still don't know,” here’s what I know
about running a business, that when I am more
grounded and able to stay in touch with my
sense of pleasure and ease and openness and
love, I’m a way better leader, I make much
better creative decisions, I take care of
everyone around me, and everything just seems
to run with more ease and more fun and more
connection.
And I know when I’ve gone too long in that
really hard driving mode, everything suffers.
Not only how I feel about myself but the results
that I create.
So that’s actually been one of my little
tricks because when I can stay in that driving
mode ain’t nothing gonna be like, “I ain’t
got time for the bath, momma.
I ain’t got time for it.
Can’t happen.”
But then I start to use those tricks and it
really does work.
I want to talk now about rupture because rupture
is really another important component of your
book.
How do you define that for us women and what’s
the power in recognizing it?
Rupture is whenever your heart breaks, things
get busted up, it does not go your way.
It is a huge part of life.
Huge.
You cannot avoid rupture.
You cannot hide from rupture.
Rupture will find you.
Just like autumn then winter comes, you can’t
stop it and you don't want to stop it because
if you do you won’t get spring.
So it’s an interesting and magnificent way
for us to access who we are as women and who
our power is.
But the problem has been because the feminine
has been so devalued and we’ve been cut
off from our ability to feel and when…
I don't know about you, but weren’t you
brought up to be sugar and spice and everything
nice?
Yeah.
It wasn’t really… you don't really spend
that much time exploring those feelings of
anger or really deep sadness or grief or when
everything falls apart how do we deal?
How do we deal?
We feel ashamed actually because what you’re
supposed to say when someone says, “How
are you?”
There’s only time to say fine.
No one wants to… you know, anyone would
be shocked if you said, “You know, actually,
I had…
I am in a state of heartbreak right now.
Will you sit down and talk to me?”
We’re not taught to do that.
But the nature of the feminine is like a piano
with 88 keys.
How boring would a piano be if it had one
key?
And mostly women behave like they have one
key, middle C, and they just are like, “I’m
fine.
I’m fine.
I’m fine.”
And to really live what it means to be a woman,
you want to be a virtuoso of every facet of
your emotional life.
You want to experience the beautiful thrilling
little tinkling notes of joy and you want
that pounding beautiful dark sorrow.
In fact, the degree to which you can own your
light is only the degree to which you can
own your darkness.
They go hand in hand.
So it’s a beautiful thing for a woman to
get to play every note that she has.
That’s when you know you have a well lived
life.
Yeah, it’s true.
And I love some of the stories you told.
I want to go now to the power of community
and sisterhood because I think that’s one
of the things that I’ve learned so deeply
from you and I feel like we’ve been able
to develop together with our friendship and
I’ve seen you do it with your community
for a number of years now.
How important is it to have that community
and to have that sisterhood?
And what does it mean for us women?
Sisterhood is everything, but we live in this
time of woman hating, you know, where we as
women have been taught to be suspicious of
other women, that she’s gonna want your
spot, she’s going to want to stab you in
the back, she’s gonna want to take your
man, she’s not your friend.
Now, where do we get that from?
Well, we get it from living in a patriarchal
culture that devalues women, dishonours women,
disparages women.
So what happens is we take on the exterior
culture’s point of view and we think, “Oh,
we must be kind of hateable or not important
or maybe we’re not valuable.”
And so we internalize the patriarchal viewpoint
and then we start hating on ourselves.
So when you hate on yourself you can’t love
a sister.
It can only happen if you take that radical
and revolutionary step of standing for your
own pleasure, which leads to self love.
Because if you decide that you are important
enough to have flowers by your side one day,
then that… that is an act that takes so
much courage to say, “Ok, I know I have
no time, but I’m going to that flower store
and I’m putting flowers on my desk and I
am worth that.”
And then you do that and then suddenly you
are filled with a sense of self love.
And as soon as you’re filled with love,
like feeling that way about yourself, you
want to tell another woman about it.
You want her to have flowers on her desk.
You want her to feel the consequences of her
paying attention to her joy as a value in
this world.
And suddenly there is that sense of connection
begins to build and my standing for my pleasure
makes room for you to stand for yours and
it spreads rather than spreading this virulent
condition of self hate woman to woman, mother
to daughter all over this planet, which is
what happens currently.
We have the potential now to spread the virulent
condition of self love by taking a stand for
our joy as the highest possible value right
now.
And what happens this is then I need you.
And I need you not in the old needy kind of
way that women used to be like, “Oh, without
you, I can’t.
I’m nothing.”
But rather I need you to be as blazingly beautiful,
brave, articulate, powerful, and successful
as you can possibly be.
Why?
Because you standing in that portal opens
that portal for me.
And me choosing to be hot and fabulous and
bold and blazing as I can be opens that portal
for you to step into an even more powerful
part of yourself so that we together hold
open even more of the portal for more and
more women through the discipline of pleasure
to take sisterhood and take women to places
that we have never been before.
And that’s why I’m so excited about this
book because I feel that women are ready to
step into a bold new frontier of standing
bravely for themselves, for their own pleasure,
and that opens the portal where no matter
where we are in this world we will see sister
when we look into each other’s eyes and
we will take this entire planet higher as
a result of that.
And that’s what you do for me, lady.
That’s what you do for me.
And I’m so grateful for that.
And you do for so many, many, many millions
of women.
Thank you so much.
Well, I have to say congratulations on this
book.
I remember when you were writing it.
I remember all the angst.
Anyone who writes knows it’s not easy to
put all of your heart and all of your soul
and your ideas and your philosophies into
a book and I just want to congratulate you
because I think it’s phenomenal.
And for everyone watching, again, I completely
stand behind that title.
I believe in it.
I think you should all read it.
But thank you again for coming on, Regena.
This has been fantastic.
Thank you.
Now Regena and I would love to hear from you.
What’s the biggest insight that you’re
taking away from this conversation today?
Leave a comment below and let us know.
Now, as always, the best discussions happen
after the episode at MarieForleo.com, so go
there and leave a comment now.
And once you’re there, be sure to subscribe
to our email list and become an MF insider.
You’re gonna get instant access to a powerful
audio that I created called How to Get Anything
You Want and you’re also going to get access
to some exclusive content and special giveaways
and some insights from me that I don't share
anywhere else.
Stay on your game and keep going for your
dreams because the world needs that special
gift that only you have.
Thank you so much for watching and I’ll
catch you next time on MarieTV.
This woman from the very… like, back when
I was so scared to write this book, like scared.
Like probably as scared as I’ll be in September,
she was the house that I drove 45 minutes
to to get to her house because she is such
my friend that I was like, “Marie, I think
I have to call this book Pussy but I don't
know what to do and I’m so upset about it.”
And she’s like, “Come over and I’ll
do a muscle test on you.”